Previously
on The Curse of Oak Island...
We're 170. We're definitely
sitting on something.
RICK: The oscillator
is on a flat, hard surface.
Could this be the vault?
I found a ship's log.
"It has been agreed
that a deep pit be dug,
"and treasure securely buried.
"The pit to have
a secret entrance
by a tunnel from the shore."
There is a trail now to follow.
It fits in every aspect.
GARY:
Whoa, whoa, whoa!
Holy...
I've seen that shape before.
In the Templar prison in France.
NARRATOR: There is an island
in the North Atlantic
where people have been looking
for an incredible treasure
for more than 200 years.
So far, they have found
a stone slab
with strange symbols carved
into it,
17th century coins,
even bits of human bone.
To date, six men have died
trying to solve the mystery.
And, according to legend,
one more will have to die
before the treasure
can be found.
It is a moment
of great anticipation
in the Oak Island war room,
as Rick and Alex Lagina,
along with Jack Begley,
Charles Barkhouse
and metal detection expert
Gary Drayton,
meet with archeologist
Laird Niven on the heels
of what might be their greatest
breakthrough to date.
One that may hold the key
to solving
a 222-year-old mystery.
Laird, we've got something
to show you.
And I think you're gonna be--
I think Gary would say--
-you're gonna be blown away.
We need to get your dad
and Craig on the phone.
-All right, I'll get them up.
-Okay.
-Hey, guys.
-Guys.
NARRATOR: Also joining them
via video conference
is Rick's brother Marty and
their partner Craig Tester,
who have called in
from their offices
in Traverse City, Michigan.
So, we've invited Laird back.
I think we all understand why,
because of Gary's unique find.
I don't know what words
to put on it.
Gary, why don't you show him
this item?
Yeah, this, um, interesting find
was found in Smith's Cove...
-Okay.
-Mid-beach.
Right.
We think it's gonna
knock your socks off.
There you go, Laird.
LAIRD:
Well, it's lead.
That's a cross.
Holy...
Holy schmoly, all right.
NARRATOR:
Earlier today,
while exploring the shore
along Smith's Cove,
Rick Lagina and metal detection
expert Gary Drayton discovered
something incredible.
GARY:
That's really old.
How old?
GARY:
I would say that is somewhere
between 1200 and 1600.
I've seen that shape before.
I saw a carving like that
in the Templar prison in Domme.
NARRATOR: Even more astonishing
was the fact
that the cross was an almost
exact match to Templar carvings
that Rick Lagina and two
of his nephews had seen
on the walls of a 14th century
prison in Domme, France,
just one week ago.
If it can be determined,
with a high degree of certainty,
that it's a Templar-associated
figurine,
there's a piece of history
missing-- our history--
and I think that is what really
captivates people
about Oak Island.
"What could this mystery be
all about?"
I haven't seen anything
like that before.
-That's a good thing for an
archaeologist to say. -Yeah.
LAIRD: It's a little
asymmetrical, right?
It's quite crude.
-Pierced by a square nail.
-Yup.
I think this is a really
unique find.
There's certainly nothing
that I can see
that would contradict that.
-RICK: There's a story there.
-Yup. Yeah.
-Seems like it wants to speak.
-Mm-hmm.
And I think you're surprised
to see this, aren't you?
LAIRD:
Oh, yeah. Absolutely, yeah.
-Didn't expect that.
-No.
It's certainly quite remarkable,
when Laird gives us his opinion
that he's not seen anything
like this.
Here you have an archeologist
who's intimately involved
with activities throughout
the province of Nova Scotia,
and he's saying that...
not seen anything
like this before.
Is there any way
to estimate how long it was...
-in the environment that you
found it in
I don't think too long
because of the condition.
Lead is a soft metal,
-and you can see plenty
of detail on this. -Yeah.
-Yeah.
-Usually there's a white patina
if it's been exposed to air.
-Yeah. -Mm-hmm. -Yeah.
-GARY: The detail on it.
-There doesn't seem to be
much wear. Yeah. -Yeah.
MARTY:
Well, the conjecture,
Laird, is that... that we've
kicked around anyway, is that
we might have unearthed it
when we did our dig with you...
-Right. Mm-hmm.
-...last year.
And then it got washed
to the shore, you know,
-in that big storm.
-Yeah, no, absolutely.
NARRATOR:
Last year,
while working with Laird
to uncover evidence of possible
box drains at Smith's Cove,
the Oak Island team unearthed
a curious rock formation
known as a French drain.
Laird, I'm going
to put you on the spot now.
Man
It's definitely
what we'd call cultural, yeah.
-Okay.
-Um...
MARTY:
You mean, you're saying with...
based on your expertise, with
certainty, this is placed here?
-I believe so, yeah.
-Wow.
-Yeah.
NARRATOR:
Could the mysterious lead cross
be somehow connected
to the construction
of the French drain,
perhaps being accidentally lost
at some point
during its construction?
Smith's Cove has come
roaring back into the top tier
of, um, places
that need more investigation.
You know, in the funny way
that Oak Island seems to work,
perhaps all that excavating
we tried to do
maybe unearthed that...
what is...
could be highly significant--
that medieval lead cross.
MARTY: I mean, we don't know,
Laird. We don't know
how old or anything,
but, you know,
preliminary research indicates
that Gary, you know...
many hundreds of years.
-Mm-hmm. Yeah. -MARTY: Uh,
is that not correct, gentlemen?
Yes, from preliminary,
very preliminary research,
-and that's really...
-MARTY: Right.
-...where this discussion needs
to go is... -Yeah. -Yeah.
...what steps do we take next?
Where do we go
Religious antiquities experts?
-Can we go out of province
for some expertise? -LAIRD: Oh.
No, absolutely.
Yeah, yeah.
There's no issue with taking it
out of the province,
out of the country.
-Well, yeah, because, I mean,
it could have come from Europe,
for example, so,
approaching European
archaeologists makes sense.
-Hopefully. -Right.
-MARTY: I think
we should find a religious...
ancient religious artifacts
expert.
-Mm-hmm.
-And try and get this thing
-pinned down-- where it
came from, how old is it. -Yes.
Yeah, it could be...
I'd be very interested
-to see the results of this one.
Yeah. -MARTY: Good!
-Let's find out.
-Yup.
RICK:
We need to get to work.
LAIRD:
Yeah.
NARRATOR: Two days after
their incredible discovery
at Smith's Cove...
-Morning, guys. How are we doing
this morning? -Good, good...
NARRATOR: ...Rick and Marty
Lagina arrive at the Money Pit,
eager to resume
their massive excavation
of the H-8 drill site,
a site
which they believe
is on the same spot
where an esive
seven-foot-tall wooden vault
was first discovered
by treasure hunter
William Chappell back in 1897.
So, our game plan right now is,
we're gonna oscillate down
five feet.
-RICK: Pressures are staying
steady? -VANESSA: Yeah.
So this is a fresh new cut, and
you can see we're at about 50.
Oh, now we've creeped up
to about 75.
So yeah, we'll get the can down
about five more feet,
and then
we'll let Michel start grabbing.
NARRATOR: Three days ago,
while excavating H-8
with a 60-inch-wide
drilling caisson,
the process came
to an abrupt halt when the team
came upon what they believed
to be a large,
flat, wooden platform
at a depth of 170 feet.
So, uh, he says his pressures
right now are up to 150,
-and he feels like he's sitting
on something.
We're hopeful
that we're close to answers.
We've spent an awful lot
of effort to bring in
this massive equipment
and dig in this one spot,
following a well that produced
all kinds of tantalizing clues.
So, yeah, we're hopeful.
We're getting to the depth
where there should be answers.
NARRATOR: As the team
from Irving Equipment Limited
now resumes drilling
by using a slightly smaller,
permanent caisson,
Marty Lagina joins Jack Begley
and Charles Barkhouse
as they continue
their careful examination
of the spoils recently
retrieved from the H-8 shaft.
-Oh, a bit of pottery! Look!
-Wow.
-No way.
-Look at that. -Oh, my gosh!
-CHARLES: That's a nice piece.
-That's a really nice piece.
That might be one
of the best pieces
of pottery we found so far.
NARRATOR: Pottery? At an
approximate depth of 150 feet?
Could this piece be connected
to the other intriguing
artifacts found in H-8,
like parchment,
fragments
of leather bookbinding
and pieces of human bone?
Is there a design on it, too?
-Yeah, there is.
-Yeah, it's like a leaf.
-It's all so thin. -It's raised,
too, like you can see.
-JACK: Oh, yeah.
-CHARLES: Yeah. Wow. That's...
MARTY:
It's hard to picture
workers down there
with such a fine piece of China
eating their...
Oh, yeah,
we have found some nice pieces.
I'm hoping that maybe the
original depositors used this,
and when we get
to the lower level of it,
we might find
some ancient stuff.
That's the hope. Clues.
NARRATOR: As the 50-inch-wide
drilling caisson
makes its way down
the H-8 shaft...
...it seems to encounter
no resistance,
as if it is sinking
under its own weight.
So, our shaft's excavating
without us.
-Okay.
-Uh, starting, we're at 162,
and our shaft elevation
without us even digging
is now at 172.
-So...
-Oh, wow.
From a driller's perspective,
we would say
that's about a ten-foot void.
But we dropped,
and we're filling up.
NARRATOR:
A ten
Located at a depth of 170 feet?
Could Rick, Marty
and the Oak Island team
have finally penetrated
the mysterious Chappell Vault?
NARRATOR:
At the Oak Island Money Pit...
The casing falling
was one thing,
but what this is doing now?
Unbelievable.
NARRATOR:
...Craig Tester and Rick Lagina
have just heard
the shocking news
that the H-8 caisson has
encountered a mysterious void
at a depth of some 170 feet,
the same depth
where they were resting
on what they believed
to be a large wooden object
just three days ago.
Okay, so,
the can is below the level
of the solution channel.
Um, or that's where
the teeth are, anyway.
NARRATOR:
It is Terry's assessment
that the team is now into
some kind of cavern or tunnel.
But if so, what has become
of the wooden obstruction?
Has the team from Irving
drilled into it,
or could they
have drilled past it?
You know,
is there a void there now,
and is it pushing something
ahead of it?
There's all these issues,
if you will, with H-8.
And there's no question
about it,
it's an emotional
roller coaster.
Hey, Marty.
How's it going, Rick?
It's confusing right now.
-We're all confused.
Why?
Craig, tell him.
The, uh... so, the can's
down to, like, 185.
-Yeah.
-But the plug inside
has moved down five or six feet.
-That's great news.
-It bodes well.
It's in-- it's certainly
interesting.
-We'll see.
-What it means, I don't know.
I'll tell you what it means.
It means we're in the Money Pit.
We're in the collapse
of the Money Pit,
and we're gonna find
what was ever in there.
That's what it means.
NARRATOR:
The collapse of the Money Pit?
In 1861,
treasure hunters attempted
to reach
the original treasure vault
by digging a shaft
adjacent to it.
However, when they reached
a depth of 118 feet,
the shaft, known as Shaft 6,
began to flood and cave in.
Shortly thereafter, they heard
a loud series of crashes,
leading to speculation
that the Money Pit collapsed,
taking whatever
possible treasure down with it.
Could this mysterious void
really be a part
of the Money Pit's collapse?
MARTY:
Any void
before bedrock
is very exciting to me.
Because my pet theory is
that the Money Pit collapsed,
that all those dimensions
that were given years ago
are all inaccurate now
because everything
sloughed down the hole,
and we're looking
for where it could have landed.
Well, if there is sort of a void
it all fell into,
now we're approaching it.
NARRATOR: While waiting
for the team from Irving
to drill down
into the mysterious chamber
at the Money Pit,
metal detection expert
Gary Drayton and Rick Lagina
return to Smith's Cove
to continue their search
of the same area
where they found a mysterious
lead cross just days ago.
RICK: Where do you want
to start first?
GARY: We'll pick up
where we found the cross.
We'll do the areas
around the rock pools,
and then I think
we should get in the rock pools.
RICK: That cross
can't be a singular item.
No, I really don't think so.
RICK: There's no question
that today at Smith's Cove,
you know, holds high promise...
simply for one fact.
The cross intrigues all of us.
It's an interesting object.
Whenever I hear Gary say
"that's very old,"
then it's very important
to get back in that area.
Yeah, I like
this little corridor,
-so I think we'll go up
and down, up and down. -Okay.
Iron.
No, that's definitely iron.
-I know you know
what you're doing. -Yeah.
And that's why I was
so impressed with the cross,
because you believe
it's that old.
Yup. For sure.
RICK: If anyone could ever
be given the moniker
"treasure hunter,"
it's Gary Drayton.
There we go.
That sounded good.
I found that by accident,
slipping on the rock.
That's a great sounding target.
Pull tab.
No. This is gonna be
something good.
Let me just see
if I can pinpoint it,
which will be a bad sign.
You never know, though.
-Okay.
So, that means it's close.
Ooh!
Oh! That looks like the arm
of something.
-That's interesting shape.
-It's lead.
That's an interesting
piece of lead, though.
-Oh!
Or a handle?
GARY:
It could well be a spoon handle.
It's like an "O" shape.
NARRATOR:
A lead spoon?
Found in the same area
as a mysterious medieval cross?
Could these artifacts
be in some way connected?
They would've cut the shape
of it out of a piece of wood
and poured the lead
into the mold.
That looks like it was made
in the mold.
Oh, man, I thought
that was something else,
-when I first heard it.
-Yeah, I know. You were jumping.
Yeah, I've got crosses
on the mind now.
It's definitely
interesting find.
Mm-hmm.
-Perhaps Laird can look at it.
-Yeah.
We respect Laird's opinion.
It's-it's why he's...
we've welcomed him as part
of the team, if you will,
and-and I think
we should reach out to him
and see if he can't assist us
in some way
and perhaps date it.
GARY:
That was it.
All right, let's see
if there's anything else,
'cause the rest of it
might be around here.
Yeah, I don't think
that's too far under the water.
Straight in the middle, mate.
I like it when you turn
your shovel over
and you can see what it is
just sticking out the top,
especially when it's a piece
of silver or gold.
-RICK: Oh.
There it is. Looks like
the fastenings were here.
Some kind of decorative
brass piece.
Maybe off the side of a boat.
NARRATOR:
While metal detecting
in the area
known as Smith's Cove...
There it is.
...Rick Lagina and Gary Drayton
have just made
a potentially significant find.
Looks like some kind
of decorative brass piece.
Maybe off the side of a boat.
NARRATOR:
A brass piece from a boat?
Could this have been part
of an ancient ship,
one of many theorized
to have visited Oak Island?
Yeah, we're getting
some big pieces of metal
-off this beach.
-Right.
And I've been over
this beach before,
obviously previous years.
So it's either
the storms bringing stuff in
or pushing stuff off the banks.
Yeah, you would never
have missed
-two big targets like that.
-No.
Yeah, these are too big to miss.
RICK: The interest
in Smith's Cove is that fact
that these are
significant finds, definitely.
We need to pursue it further.
NARRATOR:
Later that day,
Rick Lagina and Gary Drayton
rejoin the rest
of the Oak Island team
at the Money Pit drill site.
Our casing is at 196,
and our depth in the hole
is at 184.
Plug is 11.7?
-11.7, yup.
-Sweet.
NARRATOR:
Now that the oscillator
has begun drilling deeper
into the mysterious void,
it is the team's hope
that the spoils
brought to the surface
might contain artifacts
or evidence
of possible treasure.
GARY:
I'm not seeing anything.
JACK:
Yeah.
You guys ready to call it?
-JACK: Yup.
-GARY: Yeah, I think.
Is that leather?
I think I got
a bit of leather here.
Is that leather or bark?
That's probably leather.
That's...
I'd say that, yeah. I think
-there's a good possibility
that's leather.
-Yeah. Good eye.
-Yeah.
NARRATOR:
Leather?
Could this be another piece
of possible bookbinding
similar to the sample
recovered from H-8
just a few weeks ago?
Well, from such a big pile,
I mean, we're down
to, like, nothing now.
I put a lot on this table,
but there's...
-No.
GARY:
Uh, check this out.
-Oh, wow.
-Wow.
Look at that. That's a bone.
No mistaking that.
-Excellent find, Gary.
-GARY: Isn't it weird
how all this good stuff's
coming from...?
JACK:
162, right?
-Yeah. At 162.
-Yeah, this is 162.
NARRATOR:
A piece of bone?
Found in spoils taken
from a depth
of some 160 feet underground?
Oh, what's that
jumping up at us?
NARRATOR:
Nearly the same depth
where the team recovered
human bones earlier this year?
What was the depth
at which this was found?
That was between 160 and 165.
NARRATOR: But if this new bone
is also found to be human,
to whom does it belong?
Could it be related
to one of the two individuals
whose bones were dated
to sometime
in the 17th century?
Or could it be evidence
of a third
and, as yet, unidentified
visitor to the island?
Anything, guys?
-CHARLES: Yeah.
-GARY: Yeah! -JACK: Yeah!
-We got lucky.
GARY:
A bone.
MARTY:
Oh, yes.
-I have no idea.
Looks like a kind of
knuckle bone, would you say?
The end of a... end of a joint.
-A joint. There's a joint,
like... -Yeah.
That'd be, like, an elbow.
RICK:
It sounds macabre, but...
we're thinking a skeleton will
come out of there. Literally.
I mean, is it possible
that we only find
one little piece
and
GARY: Yeah, I mean, it just
caught my eye straight away.
-Yeah, 162.
RICK:
The hope continues to be
that we will find
things of substance,
things that will definitively
tell a story.
MARTY:
That's great.
-Bag it and tag it!
-Yeah.
-You...
-I'm on it.
We're only a skeleton crew,
but we're finding bones.
RICK:
That's fantastic.
NARRATOR: It is the start
of another day on Oak Island,
as brothers Rick
and Marty Lagina
join members of their team
at the H-8 drill site.
-MARTY: Good morning!
-Gentlemen.
MARTY:
How deep are we?
CRAIG:
188, 189. Something like that.
We're only about four feet
from where we found the pottery.
That's where I thought
it all fell to.
Yup.
Come on, baby!
Good day
to find Templar treasure.
NARRATOR:
But despite early evidence
that the original
six-inch-wide H-8 shaft
had located
the Oak Island Money Pit...
-RICK: Glazed pottery.
How are we getting pottery
at 190 feet?
...there is now a growing sense
of frustration
that, except for a piece of
bone and some minor artifacts,
the much larger,
50-inch-wide hole
is not turning up
more conclusive results.
RICK: The hopes and expectations
for H-8 were sky-high.
There's no question about that.
We had found
bookbinding material,
parchment, pottery
at below searcher depth,
uh, bones.
I mean, expectations
were off the charts.
But as the day progresses,
we're not finding
anything of interest.
And so, you know,
it gets to be a bit tedious.
You guys are making
some expensive gravel.
-No.
Three small pieces of iron.
Real...
Those little tiny
welding scraps.
CRAIG: I'm just concerned
we lost the material
in the zone
we're most interested in.
I'm gonna go check on this one.
JACK: I feel confident
we've explored this already.
-Yeah,
-I think we should call it.
-Okay.
MARTY:
I can't explain, in H-8,
how we got
so many significant artifacts
out of a small borehole,
six-inch borehole,
and then we run a great big,
giant six-foot caisson
down there, and we get,
really, marginally more.
I don't know why.
Numbers.
We have a 14-foot plug
right now.
But we're stuck.
-Yeah.
CRAIG: So, we think
it's just sitting on gypsum
and seems to be
some pretty big anhydrite.
Digging-wise, it's going slow.
NARRATOR: It is
the Irving team's assessment
that the casing has once again
encountered bedrock,
indicating that
there is likely nowhere else
for the H-8 shaft to go.
It also means
that their current efforts
to locate the Money Pit
must be abandoned
in favor of yet another plan.
How you feeling though, Craig?
I mean, I-I have to say
I'm disappointed. I mean...
But I thought we'd find stuff
-all the way through here.
-Me, too.
Me, too. We really have...
This hole has-has come up
-with less
than the itty-bitty hole. -Yeah.
How is that possible?
I'm just surprised that
we didn't all of a sudden go
through ten, 15 feet of mud,
at least, you know?
And it's...
None of it's been digging easy.
It's like it doesn't make sense.
On Oak Island?
Something doesn't make sense?
Unless it did... You know,
something was in front
of the can,
and we-we were pushing it
for a while
and it was pushing all the clay
out of the way.
Till it hit something hard,
and that's when the drilling
got tough.
Oh, it's still in there then.
-Just pushed to the side.
So, the hatch we dug through
has been pushed to the side?
Exactly.
NARRATOR: The failure to find
the Chappell Vault
has forced Rick, Marty,
and the Oak Island team
to face a bitter reality:
either the drilling caisson
has brushed past it,
or it was pushed even deeper
down and out of its path.
MARTY: The roller coaster
of digging where H-8,
where we found all this stuff,
it's being pushed ahead somehow.
It's so classic Oak Island.
RICK:
It just mystifies me.
We find these intriguing clues,
which seem to indicate
there's something of substance
down there.
And yet, we come up empty.
Well, I shouldn't say empty.
A few tantalizing clues--
more bone, perhaps,
more bookbinding,
leather, um,
but not what we expected.
I'm severely disappointed,
to be honest.
All right, well,
are we sort of done for the day?
Okay. Sounds good.
NARRATOR: After
the disappointing realization
that the operation
at the H-8 drill site
has reached a dead end,
brothers Rick and Marty Lagina
have called members
of their team together
for an important meeting
in the war room.
Joining them is geophysicist
Mike West of GEMTEC Limited,
who has come
with what he believes
is important information
that could help the team
plan their next move.
So, we are kind of on pins
and needles here.
-Show us what you got.
-Well, we have something.
If it's, if it's good,
that's up-up to you.
Okay, just run her down.
NARRATOR:
Several weeks ago,
Mike ran
a dual induction device down
each of the team's
44 six-inch-wide
exploratory boreholes
drilled as a part
of their Geotech grid system.
Emitting an electromagnetic
field two feet in diameter,
the dual induction probe
scanned the earth
surrounding each borehole for
evidence of conductive objects.
So, this is just a plan view
of the grid
that we set out to investigate.
NARRATOR:
Now, Mike has created a 3-D map
representing each
of the 44 boreholes,
which shows the direction
and deviation of each shaft.
He has also incorporated
the dual induction data
to show the exact depth
and position
of each metal object
they detected.
The colors are gonna represent
the amplitude response.
It's gonna go from dark blue
to-to red.
Red's obviously gonna be
your-your strongest responses.
-Okay. -You know,
that-that would be your metals
or your... you know,
when you pass by casing.
They're diamond shapes because,
as you went down,
wherever your amplitude started
to rise and fall, basically,
the longer
the-the diamond shape,
kind of the longer the response.
I assume the silver things are
the casings, the big casings.
-MIKE W.: Yeah,
they're the big caissons. -Yeah.
So, I know
what you're interested in,
like, you know, when we were
logging these holes, was H-8.
Picking something else up
right here.
NARRATOR: When the team first
ran the dual induction device
down H-8,
they detected the presence
of a large metal object
at a depth of some 155 feet.
Well, it is the Chappell Vault.
NARRATOR:
Now, the team is eager to see
what the 3-D model may reveal
about the anomaly,
which they believe to be
the so-called Chappell Vault.
I was really thinking
I was gonna come in here
and stick a fork in this thing,
but we do have, uh,
a couple fairly significant
responses down here
that certainly stand out.
Once this 3-D model
really came together
and all these anomalies
started to line up.
-'Cause that's a cluster
of responses? -Yeah.
What's the depth right there?
MIKE W.:
You're in the 150 to 160 range.
If you say H-8 happens to be
the center of the Money Pit,
which I think it is,
and then you drew a seven-foot
radius circle around it,
which is what the Money Pit
would have been,
you will, effectively,
get all those anomalies.
-Yeah.
If you say H-8 happens to be
the center of the Money Pit,
you will, effectively,
get all those anomalies.
-Yeah.
NARRATOR: During a meeting
in the Oak Island war room,
geophysicist Mike West
is sharing
some incredible information
as to why the team failed
to turn up solid evidence
of the Chappell Vault
during their excavation
of Borehole H-8.
The data supports that there's
some very interesting things
going on in a very defined area.
I think we keep finding out
that this is the Money Pit.
Right where it should be,
really.
The results of
the dual induction log testing
in-in, uh, H-8 indicate
that there is a significant
anomaly about 150 feet.
Well, that's exactly,
exactly where the Chappell Vault
should be.
So it's highly significant.
It's exciting.
You know, what's interesting is,
we get to depth,
look how, look how little
we really did.
-Yeah. -Because, you know,
we're falling out,
hitting bedrock, stopping.
But look at that.
By the time we get to 200 feet,
we got four holes.
Which shows where the gaps are,
for one thing.
Like it says right there,
there's big gaps
right in there
where there's nothing.
-MARTY: Right here
and right here. -Yeah.
NARRATOR: Although the team
completed a total
of 44 carefully plotted
boreholes,
several of them deviated
in the course of drilling,
meaning some areas remain
unexplored in the Money Pit,
particularly around a depth
of 200 feet.
RICK: We have come to learn,
because of the...
gyro data
and the dual induction system,
that there are
undiscovered areas,
or areas that
were not penetrated
by the pattern drilling program.
I mean, we have to investigate
these areas that are
of significant size-- something
could be hiding there.
JACK: The big positive
we should have out of this
is that there is a target
in the Money Pit
where it's supposed to be.
Right?
-Yes, I think so.
-Otherwise-- yeah.
Despite all of the open area
that we missed,
we still got a hit
where we
were looking for it at.
Yeah, the bad news is
it's not in a five-foot circle.
-CRAIG: No.
-Yeah.
MARTY: It's good news.
I mean, there's all
these theories about where
the Money Pit itself is.
You know,
the original excavation.
I think we found it.
I'm convinced we found it.
So yeah, it's a very...
that's a huge bit of news,
and it's probably...
I mean, to me, I think it means
we're nearing the end
of the hunt.
This is good, this is exactly
what we wanted you to do.
Thank you very much.
Here's what I read
from your body language
and your presentation
and everything
that's gone on here today,
said and unsaid.
There's no way
you'd quit on this.
-No. No, I still want
to know, too. -Yeah.
Okay. Well, we're gonna put
all the data we can to it,
and then, you know, the fates'll
do what the fates want to do.
So, let's call this one...
wrapped.
*
NARRATOR: One day after
receiving important information
indicating that the
50-inch-wide drilling caisson
may have literally pushed
evidence of the Chappell Vault
farther down
and then out of its way...
-MARTY: Hey, guys.
-CRAIG: Hey.
-Grab seats.
-...Rick, Marty,
Craig and members
of their Oak Island team
meet once again
in the war room to discuss
their next course of action.
They have also invited
geologist Terry Matheson
and area historian Doug Crowell
to offer their guidance
and expertise.
Okay, guys,
this is a crucial meeting,
and it's got to happen quick,
and we have to make
some decisions.
As everyone's aware,
we're finishing up, uh, H-8.
We have a little bit
of money left,
but the contractor wants
a decision, needs a decision.
It's either up or down,
spend the money,
dig one more hole,
or give over for this year.
We have to make
the decision tonight.
*
Terry, what's your input?
Stop and review.
Spoken like a true scientist.
Do you think there's
something here to find?
I think there's possibly
something buried there.
A buried treasure, yes.
MARTY:
What I'm still saying,
you know, against all hope,
against all odds, I mean,
that that Chappell Vault
is actually there.
-You think it's there,
don't you? -Of course.
-Yeah, it's there.
-I think... I think it is.
-Well, we didn't find it,
and there's not...
it's not hiding this way.
We have too much data that way.
So, where do you
approximate it to be, then?
Well, if we had to move the "X"
away from the caisson,
what direction should we...?
So, H-8's sitting
right about here, right?
It's the penciled-in circle.
-That's the big caisson
right now. -DOUG: To me...
you got to look up to 20 feet
in this direction.
MARTY:
Somewhere right in here.
Am I reading this right, Craig?
There is quite a lot
of missing data
-Yeah.
I mean, we put a well here,
we put a well here,
we put a well here.
It's unexplored area
at the depth
-that the chamber's
thought to be. -Mm-hmm.
NARRATOR: It is Doug's
assessment that the chamber
they are looking for--
and along with it, the vault--
could lie in a nearly
ten-by-20-foot area
to the south of the Chappell
and H-8 shafts,
where the team
has not yet drilled.
MARTY:
You know, when you amalgamated
all the data
and put fresh eyes on it,
there's room for
that Chappell Vault, possibly.
It's an unsearched area.
We had, as part
of our pattern drilling program,
had a pretty good understanding
of the underground geology
and the underground,
uh, searcher work.
I mean, it's worth pursuing.
I make a motion we dig one more
well yet this year right here.
Do I have a second?
GARY:
I'm biased.
The more drilling you do,
the more stuff you bring up,
-the more chance I've got
to find something.
-Dig. You're in the dig camp.
-Yeah. Yeah.
Hmm. Charles, speak.
I'm abstaining.
It's your decision.
You three.
Not us.
MARTY: Craig,
what do you say at this point?
Um, you know, well,
it's up to you guy--
it's up to you, Rick, more,
'cause-- and the other guys
around this table--
because I'm...
when I'm headed out of here,
I'm probably...
:
...not coming back this year.
...when I'm headed out of here,
I'm probably...
:
...not coming back this year.
*
NARRATOR:
While meeting in the war room,
Rick, Marty
and the Oak Island team
have just heard the shocking
news that their partner,
Craig Tester,
will be leaving the island.
CRAIG:
It's up to you, Rick, more,
'cause-- and the other guys
around this table--
because, um...
you know, I don't want to say,
"Hey, drill here,"
and then not be here
to support you guys.
*
Earlier this year,
Craig and his family
suffered the loss of Craig's
16-year-old son, Drake,
who died of complications
following an epileptic seizure.
CRAIG:
Oak Island, for me, has helped.
Um, it takes my focus
off losing Drake.
Um...
I think of him every day.
I think I'm always out here.
I wish he could be here
helping us.
So, um, it's been a tough year.
Um, time for me to head on home
and... uh, help my wife, who's
struggling through this, too.
Ad, um, so, I'm appreciative
for all the guys,
and I'm appreciate for...
for Oak Island,
for everything it's done for me.
You'll always be here
whether you're here or not.
MARTY:
Yeah, that's okay, Craig.
-Yeah. Yeah. -Everybody
understands that. -For sure.
You won't be able
to kick Jack out of here
-with a ten-foot pole,
so he'll be here. -Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah.
MARTY: It's got to be
bittersweet for Craig out here.
I don't know what's
going on inside him.
I can only guess.
I mean, this is painful stuff.
So Craig's suffering a lot
and he's grieving.
Look, whatever he wants.
Whatever Craig wants, whatever
Craig feels is best for him,
and I... I'm not
going to do anything
but say, "I'll support
whatever decision you make."
I kind of want
to finish this now.
Especially 'cause you said
you're not coming back.
And this is a chance
to finish it.
You know...
I don't know
how to say it exactly,
-but...
I kind of want to try
and finish this for Drake.
There, I said it.
I don't know,
I'm-I'm...
*
Well...
I said it from the start:
one in, all in,
once in, forever in.
I've given it
everything I've got
for-for the last ten years.
You know me, I'm not a quitter.
I was just about to say,
so now you're gonna quit?
No. So...
let's find it.
For everyone.
RICK:
What's the point of being here
if we're not going to try
everything
within our means to...
get an answer?
We're here, in the now,
you know?
Why would we... why would we
not aggressively do this
as best we can?
And so, what does that mean?
It means...
put another caisson down.
There's no...
no question in my mind
we need to continue.
We dig another well
approximately here
to be fine-tuned
between Rick and Doug
and Charles.
What? What were you
gonna say, Jack?
Can we name it
after my brother, too?
Of course you can.
-Thank you.
-Yeah.
JACK: We asked to name the hole
after Drake, and so...
we decided to just use
his initials, uh, DMT.
And...
it-it meant a lot
to me.
Maybe this is the hole
that finds it all.
But it's good to know that...
my brother's a part
of this island forever now.
Okay, good.
Let's dig one more hole
while we're in on this, okay?
Enough of this.
In, in.
-TERRY: Charles, Charles.
-CRAIG: The brothers.
-Let's do it!
-All right!
Good.
NARRATOR:
For Rick, Marty and the team,
it has been a week
of both incredible discovery
and heartbreaking
disappointment.
But as one door closes
on what began
as a promising investigation
at the H-8 shaft,
another... may have opened
in the form
of a mysterious medieval cross.
A cross that could be not only
the first tangible evidence
that the Oak Island
treasure exists,
but that finding it
could mean riches
that are measured
in something more substantial
than mere dollars and cents,
a treasure that could be worth
all the years
of blood and sweat
that went into finding it.
Next time, on
The Curse of Oak Island...
-This is "X" marks the spot.
-Yup.
Let's get that can down hole
and find this thing.
We're good to go, guys!
TOM: It was one of the things
Fred found on the island.
Is this the key
to unlock the mystery?
to Nolan's Cross?
CAPTIONING PROVIDED BY
A+E NETWORKS